**Co-regulated molecular signatures between the target tissue and surrogate tissue in responding to environmental toxic substances**

Exposure to toxic substances can perturb epigenomic marks, which are correlated with the pathogenesis of many diseases. Many epigenetic studies of environmental exposures in humans assess effects in accessible surrogate tissues, such as blood. The accumulation of toxic substances differs among organs, and may induce tissue-specific molecular responses. Understanding whether exposure-induced epigenomic alterations in surrogate tissues such as blood reflect changes in toxicant target tissues, such as the liver, is essential for designing and interpreting environmental epigenetics studies. To characterize the commonality of the molecular response of various tissues to toxicant exposures, we systematically analyzed the multi-omics data generated by the TaRGET II Consortium (Toxicant Exposures and Responses by Genomic and Epigenomic Regulators of Transcription). We performed a target tissue against surrogate tissue comparison of epigenomic and transcriptomic changes in mouse liver and blood following perinatal exposure to arsenic (As), lead (Pb), bisphenol A (BPA), tributyltin (TBT), the di-2-Ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), the dioxin tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), or air pollution in the form of particulate matter <2.5μm (PM2.5). We analyzed 1720 omics data, including RNA-seq, WGBS, and ATAC-seq data. The vast majority of molecular changes in response to a specific toxicant were tissue-specific. We concluded that a set of genes and regulatory elements were co-regulated between these two tissues. Moreover, we observed that specific pathways, especially immune-related pathways, were commonly altered in the liver and blood following exposure to BPA, TBT, and PM2.5. We also discovered that transcription factors, i.e., Klf, Jun, Ets1, and Cebp, could be common regulators between liver and blood in response to BPA, TBT, and PM2.5 exposure. While we found that specific molecular alterations are rarely conserved between tissues following toxicant exposure, we did identify that alterations in transcription factors and biological pathways may provide a strategy to link effects in surrogate tissues to target tissues.
